feat: Editorial review: Add content for overlay and discrete animation features (#29943)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/popover_api/using/index.md

See our [Popover blur background example](https://mdn.github.io/dom-examples/popover-api/blur-background/) ([source](https://github.com/mdn/dom-examples/tree/main/popover-api/blur-background)) for an idea of how this renders.

## Animating popovers

> Popovers are set to `display: none;` when hidden and `display: block;` when shown, as well as being removed from / added to the {{glossary("top layer")}}. Therefore, for popovers to be animated `display` needs to be animatable. This is now the case; [supporting browsers](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#browser_compatibility) animate `display` with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). Specifically, the browser will flip between `none` and another value of `display` so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration. So for example:

Author: There were some details I liked here, so I've added some of them, here and to the similar paragraph in the `<dialog>` element page. However, I've not made some of the changes, because they contain details specific to transitions or keyframe animations, and it starts to sound like the two are conflated. This paragraph is trying to be neutral and talk about animations in general, as the behavior change applies to both. The two further down discussed the specifics of keyframe animations and transitions.

> Popovers are set to `display: none;` when hidden and `display: block;` when shown, as well as being removed from / added to the {{glossary("top layer")}}. Therefore, for popovers to be animated `display` needs to be animatable. This is now the case; [supporting browsers](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#browser_compatibility) animate `display` with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). Specifically, the browser will flip between `none` and another value of `display` so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration. So for example:

Author: I also think the example given is easier to read when not in the large paragraph format, so I've not made that change.

- When animating between `display` `none` and `block`, the value will flip to `block` at `0%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.

> - When animating between `display` `block` and `none`, the value will flip to `none` at `100%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.

Author: See above comment.

> > **Note:** When animating using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions), `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` needs to be set to enabled the above behavior. When animating with [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) the above behavior is available by default; an equivalent step is not required.

Author: Changes made. It does make sense to link it in both places.

### Transitioning a popover

> When animating popovers with transitions, the following are required:

Author: Updated

> - [`@starting-style`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style) is used to provide a set of starting values for properties set on the popover that you want to transition from when it is shown. This is needed because, by default, CSS transitions are not triggered on elements' first style updates, or when the `display` type changes from `none` to another type, to avoid unexpected behavior.
> - [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) needs to be added to the transitions list so that the popover will remain as `display: block` for the duration of the animation, allowing the other animations to be seen.
> - [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) needs to be added to the transitions list so that the removal of the popover from the top layer will be deferred until the animation is finished, again allowing the other animations to be seen.
> - [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) needs to be set on the `display` and `overlay` transitions. This effectively enables discrete transitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`@starting-style`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style) at-rule
  - : Provide the set of starting values for properties set on the popover that you want to transition from when it is shown. By default, CSS transitions only occur when a property changes on a visible iterm from one value to another. They are not triggered on an element's first style, when `display` changes from `none` to a visible value. Setting the starting values with `@start-style` provides initial values to transition from when the element receives its first style update, thereby avoiding unexpected behavior.
- [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) property
  - : Add `display` to the transitions list so that the popover will remain as `display: block` for the duration of the transition, ensuring the other transitions are visible.
- [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) property
  - : Include `overlay` in the transitions list to ensure the removal of the popover from the top layer is deferred until the transition completes, again ensuring the transition is visible.
- {{cssxref("transition-behavior")}} property
  - : Set `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` on the `display` and `overlay` transitions to enable discrete transitions on these two properties that are not by default animatable.
```

Author: Mostly good; I've made a few tweaks to fix a few small issues (like the default is what avoids unexpected behavior, not setting `@starting-style` rules; that overrides the default when you need to.)

Let's have a look at an example so you can see what this looks like:

> The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared to be a popover via the global [`popover`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) HTML attribute. A {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control:
```
as we use the popover attribute as the selector, want to highlight the attribute's existence again since we are so far from the initial inclusion in the document itself.

Author: Yup, good call. Changed.

```html
<button popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

The CSS for the example looks like this:

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

/* Transition for the popover itself */

[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;
  opacity: 0;
  transform: scaleX(0);
  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,
    transform 0.7s,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    display 0.7s allow-discrete;

> }

Reviewer: can we just say `transition: 0.7s allow-discrete;` default to `all`? We should mention in the content if so or if not.

Author: Ah, this is a really good point. I've added comments of the following kind to allow appropriate examples across the PR:

```css
/* Equivalent to  
    all 0.7s allow-discrete */
```

I've tested it, and it does work.

/* Needs to be after the previous [popover]:popover-open rule to take effect,
    as the specificity is the same */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}

/* Transition for the popover's backdrop */

[popover]::backdrop {

>   background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  background-color: rgba(0 0 0 / 0);
```

`rgba()` is legacy. Use `rgb()` instead.

Author: Ack, dammnit. I have changed them all to the `rgb(0 0 0 / 0)` form.

  transition:
    display 0.7s allow-discrete,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    background-color 0.7s;
}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {

>   background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.25);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25);
```

Author: changed

}

/* This starting-style rule cannot be nested inside the above selector
because the nesting selector cannot represent pseudo-elements. */

@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {

>     background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
```

Author: changed

  }
}
```

> The two popover properties we want to show animations for are [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) — specifically, a horizontally scaling transform. We want the popover to fade in and out, as well as growing/shrinking horizontally. To achieve this, we have set a starting state for these properties on the default hidden state of the popover element (selected via `[popover]`), and an end state on the open state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class). We then set a [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property to animate between the two.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two popover properties we want to transition in and out are [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) — specifically, a horizontally scaling transform. We want the popover to fade in or out while growing or shrinking horizontally. To achieve this, we set a starting state for these properties on the default hidden state of the popover element (selected with the `[popover]` [attribute selector](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Attribute_selectors)) and an end state for the open state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class). We also set the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) to set the properties to animate and the duration of the animation as the property values change when the popover gets displayed or hidden.
```

Author: mostly good; I've used it and made a few tweaks.

And as discussed earlier, we have:

- Set a starting state for the transition inside the `@starting-style` block.
- Added `display` to the list of transitioned elements so that the animated element is visible (set to `display: block`) throughout both the entry and exit animation. Without this, the exit animation would not be visible; in effect, the popover would just disappear.

> - Added `overlay` to the list of transitioned elements to make sure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. This doesn't make a huge difference for simple animations such as this one, but in more complex cases not doing this can result in the element being removed from the overlay too quickly, meaning the animation is not smooth or effective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added `overlay` to the list of transitioned elements to make sure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. The effect of this may not be noticeable for basic animations such as this one, but in more complex cases, omitting this property can result in the element being removed from the overlay before the transition completes.
```

Author: Updated

> - Set `allow-discrete` on both the above transitions to enable discrete transitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set `allow-discrete` on both the above transitions to enable [discrete transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete).
```

Author: updated

> You'll note that we've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) that appears behind the popover when it opens, to provide a nice darkening animation. `[popover]:popover-open::backdrop` is needed to select the backdrop when the popover is open.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll note that we've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) appearing behind the popover when it opens, providing a nice darkening animation.
```
I removed:

>The `[popover]:popover-open::backdrop` selector matches the backdrop pseudo-element when the popover is open.

as `::backdrop` matches the element too and we don't need to style some backdrops differently from others. that would be less than optimal UX, so we might not want to promote the idea.

Author: ok, updated

The code renders as follows:

{{ EmbedLiveSample("Transitioning a popover", "100%", "200") }}

### A popover keyframe animation

When animating a popover with CSS animations, there are some differences to note:

> - You don't provide a starting state inside a `@starting-style` block; instead, you need to provide the starting `display` value in an explicit starting keyframe (for example using `0%` or `from`).
> - You don't need to enable discrete transitions; there is no equivalent to `allow-discrete` inside keyframes.
> - You can't set `overlay` inside keyframes either, but we found we could get the animation example working OK by setting the animations as appropriate on the shown and closed states of the popover via CSS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Don't include a `@starting-style` block. Instead, provide the starting values, including the initial `display` value, in the starting keyframe (Using the `0%` or `from` keyframes in the name [`@keyframes`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@keyframes) animation definition.
- Discrete transitions are not enabled; there is no equivalent to `allow-discrete` inside keyframes.
- Exclude the `overlay` for the `@keyframes` block. In keyframe animations, the `display` value is not animated. Rather, the values of properties that are not animatable change to the value declared in the keyframe when encountered. This means the display value changes in the same keyframe as the animation completion, so `overlay` has no effect.
```

I don't know who we is or what "we found we could get the animation example working OK by setting the animations as appropriate on the shown and closed states of the popover via CSS." meant, so i added the likely CSS reason for your results in instead.

Author: Yup, I'm totally aware that my previous text was crap and wishy-washy, and I do appreciate the help in trying to improve it ;-) But, I found your explanation confusing; it didn't make sense to me. `display` _is_ animated. And I got totally lost on the meaning of the second bit.  In the end, I used some of your suggestions, and arrived at the following second attempt:

---

- You don't provide a `@starting-style`; instead, you provide the starting values (including the initial `display` value) in an explicit starting keyframe (using `0%` or `from`).
- You don't need to explicitly enable discrete animations; there is no equivalent to `allow-discrete` inside keyframes.
- You don't need to set `overlay` inside keyframes either; the `display` animation handles the animation of the popover from shown to hidden.

> Let's look at an example. The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example

In this example, the HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control:

#### HTML
```

Author: Yup, good call, helps to break it up a bit. I've added these subheadings as appropriate in the Popover and `<dialog>` element docs.

Author: oop, scratch that. I've removed them again, and instead added individual HTML/CSS/JavaScript/Result headings.

```html
<button id="toggle-button" popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="manual" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

> The CSS is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### CSS
```

Author: OK, I've added these subsections to all of the pages. And I think they are easier to read as a result. I'll do this in all future example sections.

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;
  animation: fade-out 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

[popover]:popover-open {
  animation: fade-in 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
  animation: backdrop-fade-in 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

/* Animation keyframes */

@keyframes fade-in {
  0% {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
    display: none;
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 1;
    transform: scaleX(1);
    display: block;
  }
}

@keyframes fade-out {
  0% {
    opacity: 1;
    transform: scaleX(1);
    display: block;
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
    display: none;
  }
}

@keyframes backdrop-fade-in {

>   0% {
>     background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0);
>   }
> 
>   100% {
>     background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.25);
>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  0% {
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  }

  100% {
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25);
  }
```

Author: changed

}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Result

```

Author: added

> We have defined keyframes that specify the desired entry and exit animations, and an entry animation for the backdrop only. Note that it wasn't possible to reproduce a keyframe animation for the backdrop fade out at the time of writing.

Author: done

See our [Popover blur background example](https://mdn.github.io/dom-examples/popover-api/blur-background/) ([source](https://github.com/mdn/dom-examples/tree/main/popover-api/blur-background)) for an idea of how this renders.

## Animating popovers

> Popovers are set to `display: none;` when hidden and `display: block;` when shown, as well as being removed from / added to the {{glossary("top layer")}}. Therefore, for popovers to be animated `display` needs to be animatable. This is now the case; [supporting browsers](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#browser_compatibility) animate `display` with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). Specifically, the browser will flip between `none` and another value of `display` so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration. So for example:

Author: I've added a note to make it clear that `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` is required for transitions (but not animations), both here and in the `<dialog>` element page:

> **Note:** When animating using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions), `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` needs to be set to enabled the above behavior. When animating with [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) the above behavior is available by default; an equivalent step is not required.

- Set `allow-discrete` on both the above transitions to enable discrete transitions.

You'll note that we've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) that appears behind the popover when it opens, to provide a nice darkening animation. `[popover]:popover-open::backdrop` is needed to select the backdrop when the popover is open.

The code renders as follows:

{{ EmbedLiveSample("Transitioning a popover", "100%", "200") }}

### A popover keyframe animation

When animating a popover with [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations), there are some differences to note:

- You don't provide a starting state inside a `@starting-style` block; instead, you need to provide the starting `display` value in an explicit starting keyframe (for example using `0%` or `from`).
- You don't need to enable discrete transitions; there is no equivalent to `allow-discrete` inside keyframes.

> - You can't set `overlay` inside keyframes either. The best solution we found at this time to defer removal from the top layer was to use JavaScript — add/remove classes to animate the popover as required and then use {{domxref("setTimeout()")}} to defer hiding the popover until after the animation is finished.

Author: Thanks so much for your help here @OnkarRuikar. It was a while ago, and I don't remember how I arrived at such a convoluted solution. But yes, you are right. This is much simpler. On the subject of the `::backdrop` animation, I think I was reluctant to include it because at the moment you can only animate it when opening, and not when closing. But on open is better than nothing.

In my next commit, I have updated this example to include the changes proposed here, as well as the backdrop opening animation. I've changed the surrounding text to suit. I've done this for the `<dialog>` keyframe animation too.

> - You can't set `overlay` inside keyframes either. The best solution we found at this time to defer removal from the top layer was to use JavaScript — add/remove classes to animate the popover as required and then use {{domxref("setTimeout()")}} to defer hiding the popover until after the animation is finished.

Reviewer 2: > at the moment you can only animate it when opening, and not when closing. But on open is better than nothing.

It is because the backdrop is immediately removed from the DOM so there nothing to animate after closing.

> - You can't set `overlay` inside keyframes either. The best solution we found at this time to defer removal from the top layer was to use JavaScript — add/remove classes to animate the popover as required and then use {{domxref("setTimeout()")}} to defer hiding the popover until after the animation is finished.

Author: Yup. I've added some extra wording to the example explanations to explain why.

See our [Popover blur background example](https://mdn.github.io/dom-examples/popover-api/blur-background/) ([source](https://github.com/mdn/dom-examples/tree/main/popover-api/blur-background)) for an idea of how this renders.

## Animating popovers

> Popovers are set to `display: none;` when hidden and `display: block;` when shown, as well as being removed from / added to the {{glossary("top layer")}} and the [accessibility tree](/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/How_browsers_work#building_the_accessibility_tree). Therefore, for popovers to be animated the {{cssxref("display")}} property needs to be animatable. [Supporting browsers](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#browser_compatibility) animate `display` with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). Specifically, the browser will flip between `none` and another value of `display` so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration. So for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Popovers are set to `display: none;` when hidden and `display: block;` when shown, as well as being removed from / added to the {{glossary("top layer")}} and the [accessibility tree](/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/How_browsers_work#building_the_accessibility_tree). Therefore, for popovers to be animated the {{cssxref("display")}} property needs to be animatable. [Supporting browsers](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#browser_compatibility) animate `display` with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). Specifically, the browser will flip between `none` and another value of `display` so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration. So, for example:
```

Author: Updated.

> Popovers are set to `display: none;` when hidden and `display: block;` when shown, as well as being removed from / added to the {{glossary("top layer")}} and the [accessibility tree](/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/How_browsers_work#building_the_accessibility_tree). Therefore, for popovers to be animated the {{cssxref("display")}} property needs to be animatable. [Supporting browsers](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#browser_compatibility) animate `display` with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). Specifically, the browser will flip between `none` and another value of `display` so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration. So, for example:

Author: done

- When animating `display` from `none` to `block` (or another visible `display` value), the value will flip to `block` at `0%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.
- When animating `display` from `block` (or another visible `display` value) to `none`, the value will flip to `none` at `100%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.

> > **Note:** When animating using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions), [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) needs to be set to enable the above behavior. When animating with [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) the above behavior is available by default; an equivalent step is not required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** When animating using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions), [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) needs to be set to enable the above behavior. When animating with [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations), the above behavior is available by default; an equivalent step is not required.
```

### Transitioning a popover

When animating popovers with CSS transitions, the following features are required:

> - [`@starting-style`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style) at-rule

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- {{CSSxRef("@starting-style")}} at-rule
```

>   - : Provides a set of starting values for properties set on the popover that you want to transition from when it is first shown. This is needed to avoid unexpected behavior. By default, CSS transitions only occur when a property changes from one value to another on a visible element; they are not triggered on elements' first style updates, or when the `display` type changes from `none` to another type.

Author: changed

> - [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) property

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- {{CSSxRef("display")}} property
```

>   - : Add `display` to the transitions list so that the popover will remain as `display: block` for the duration of the transition, ensuring the other transitions are visible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : Add `display` to the transitions list so that the popover will remain as `display: block`, or other visible `display` value, for the duration of the transition, ensuring the other transitions are visible.
```

Author: added

>   - : Add `display` to the transitions list so that the popover will remain as `display: block` (or another visible `display` value) for the duration of the transition, ensuring the other transitions are visible.

Reviewer: Optional: add that the display value, if other than block, should be in the `:popover-open` state, otherwise the default `display none;` will be overridden

Author: I'd rather leave it out from here, as I think it might confuse more than it helps. Also, given that display is animated in several places, maybe we could deal with such details just on the display page where I talk about animating display, rather than in several places.

> - [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) property

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- {{CSSxRef("overlay")}} property
```

>   - : Include `overlay` in the transitions list to ensure the removal of the popover from the top layer is deferred until the transition completes, again ensuring the transition is visible.

Reviewer: should we fit in "all" here? So people know it doesn't need to be an explicit inclusion.

Author: I see what you are saying, but we are talking specifically about the explicit features that are required. `all` isn't an explicit feature that is required, it is more like another way of representing `display` and `overlay` in the transitions list.

I did add comments to all of the transition code examples to show that you can use `all` with `allow-discrete` rather than listing them all separately. I think that will suffice.

Let's have a look at an example so you can see what this looks like:

#### HTML

The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared to be a popover via the global [`popover`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) HTML attribute, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control:

```html
<button popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

/* Transition for the popover itself */

[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;

  /* Final state of the exit animation */
  opacity: 0;
  transform: scaleX(0);

  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,
    transform 0.7s,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    display 0.7s allow-discrete;
  /* Equivalent to
  transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */
}

/* Needs to be after the previous [popover]:popover-open rule to take effect,

>     as the specificity is the same */

Author: updated

@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}

/* Transition for the popover's backdrop */

[popover]::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  transition:
    display 0.7s allow-discrete,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    background-color 0.7s;
  /* Equivalent to
  transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */
}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25);
}

/* This starting-style rule cannot be nested inside the above selector

> because the nesting selector (&) cannot represent pseudo-elements. */

Author: changed

@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  }
}
```

> The two popover properties we want to transition are [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform). We want the popover to fade in or out while growing or shrinking horizontally. To achieve this, we set a starting state for these properties on the hidden state of the popover element (selected with the `[popover]` [attribute selector](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Attribute_selectors)) and an end state for the shown state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class). We also use the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property to define the properties to animate and the animation's duration as the popover gets shown or hidden.

Reviewer: Move (most of) this paragraph to before the line 339;  as a brief intro what we are going to do. Or just add a sentence on 339 to let the user know before the CSS what the CSS is about.

Reviewer 3: Also, use `{{CSSxRef("...")}}` for CSS properties.

Author: In both cases, I've moved the whole paragraph up to the top. I think it works fine.

And as discussed earlier, we have:

> - Set a starting state for the transition inside the `@starting-style` block.

Author: Updated

> - Added `display` to the list of transitioned elements so that the animated element is visible (set to `display: block`) throughout both the entry and exit animation. Without this, the exit animation would not be visible; in effect, the popover would just disappear.

Author: Changed!

> - Added `overlay` to the list of transitioned elements to make sure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. The effect of this may not be noticeable for basic animations such as this one, but in more complex cases, omitting this property can result in the element being removed from the overlay before the transition completes.

Author: updated

> - Set `allow-discrete` on both the above transitions to enable [discrete transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete).

Author: changed

You'll note that we've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) appearing behind the popover when it opens, providing a nice darkening animation.

#### Result

The code renders as follows:

{{ EmbedLiveSample("Transitioning a popover", "100%", "200") }}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the popover is transitioning from `display: none` to `display: block, every time the popover opens, it transitions from the `@start-style` styles to the`[popover]:popover-open` styles. When the popover exits, it transitions from `[popover]:popover-open` state to the default `[popover]` state.
```
I think it's important to delineate that every time it opens it goes to start-style, not just the first time.

Author: Agreed that we need to make this clear. I've added these notes in appropriate places. 

I've also added an explanatory section and an example to the `@starting-style` page to explain and demonstrate the behavior. I've linked the notes in other places to the example so it can be seen in action.

### A popover keyframe animation

When animating a popover with CSS keyframe animations, there are some differences to note:

> - You don't provide a `@starting-style`; instead, you provide the starting values (including the initial `display` value) in an explicit starting keyframe (using `0%` or `from`).

Author: ok, makes sense; updated

- You don't explicitly enable discrete animations; there is no equivalent to `allow-discrete` inside keyframes.
- You don't need to set `overlay` inside keyframes either; the `display` animation handles the animation of the popover from shown to hidden.

Let's look at an example.

#### HTML

The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control:

```html
<button id="toggle-button" popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="manual" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;
  animation: fade-out 0.7s ease-out;
}

[popover]:popover-open {
  animation: fade-in 0.7s ease-out;
}

> [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {

Reviewer: you could use the `reverse` animation direction and just have one keyframe animation

Author: I'm not sure how feasible this is now that I've applied the changes @OnkarRuikar suggested in a previous comment. fade-in and fade-out are no longer direct opposites of one another. I'll leave it as-is.

  animation: backdrop-fade-in 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

/* Animation keyframes */

@keyframes fade-in {
  0% {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 1;
    transform: scaleX(1);
  }
}

@keyframes fade-out {
  0% {
    opacity: 1;
    transform: scaleX(1);
    /* display needed on the closing animation to keep the popover visible
       until the animation ends */
    display: block;
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);

>     display: none;

Reviewer: we should add a note about it then.

>     display: none;

Author: Note added

  }
}

@keyframes backdrop-fade-in {
  0% {
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  }

  100% {

>     background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25);

Reviewer: this looks like it should make everything inert, including the toggle for the popover. Consider changing the color or lightening it.

Author: I've fixed this example differently, as I'd rather not mess with the styling. I've changed all instances to talk about displaying, not toggling. I've made sure all the examples use auto popovers, not manual, so the popover can be light-dismissed (by clicking outside it and pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key). And I've changed the label of the button to "Show the popover".

You can still dismiss the popover by clicking the toggle button again, as it is a popover toggle by default. But now, even if people think the contents behind the popover are inert, it doesn't matter because that state can easily be escaped from.

See our [Popover blur background example](https://mdn.github.io/dom-examples/popover-api/blur-background/) ([source](https://github.com/mdn/dom-examples/tree/main/popover-api/blur-background)) for an idea of how this renders.

## Animating popovers

> Popovers are set to `display: none;` when hidden and `display: block;` when shown, as well as being removed from / added to the {{glossary("top layer")}} and the [accessibility tree](/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/How_browsers_work#building_the_accessibility_tree). Therefore, for popovers to be animated the {{cssxref("display")}} property needs to be animatable. This is now the case; [supporting browsers](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#browser_compatibility) animate `display` with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). Specifically, the browser will flip between `none` and another value of `display` so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration. So for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Popovers are set to `display: none;` when hidden and `display: block;` when shown, as well as being removed from / added to the {{glossary("top layer")}} and the [accessibility tree](/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/How_browsers_work#building_the_accessibility_tree). Therefore, for popovers to be animated the {{cssxref("display")}} property needs to be animatable. [Supporting browsers](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display#browser_compatibility) animate `display` with a variation on the [discrete animation type](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete). Specifically, the browser will flip between `none` and another value of `display` so that the animated content is shown for `100%` of the animation duration. So, for example:
```
Prefer omitting "this is new" lingo as this will otherwise not be removed for likely 10 years (ie, i am spending this week removing "when flex is supported" weaved throughout the cookbook)

Author: Yup, I totally agree with you; I've made the change here, and elsewhere too.

- When animating between `display` `none` and `block`, the value will flip to `block` at `0%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.
- When animating between `display` `block` and `none`, the value will flip to `none` at `100%` of the animation duration so it is visible throughout.

> **Note:** When animating using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions), [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) needs to be set to enable the above behavior. When animating with [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) the above behavior is available by default; an equivalent step is not required.

### Transitioning a popover

When animating popovers with CSS transitions, the following features are required:

- [`@starting-style`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style) at-rule

>   - : Provides a set of starting values for properties set on the popover that you want to transition from when it is first shown. This is needed because, by default, CSS transitions only occur when a property changes from one value to another on a visible element; they are not triggered on elements' first style updates, or when the `display` type changes from `none` to another type, to avoid unexpected behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : Provides a set of starting values for properties set on the popover that you want to transition from when it is first shown. This is needed, to avoid unexpected behavior because, by default, CSS transitions only occur when a property changes from one value to another on a visible element; they are not triggered on elements' first style updates, or when the `display` type changes from `none` to another type.
```

Author: I agree that the position of this could be improved. I ended up going with this sentence structure:

> This is needed to avoid unexpected behavior. By default, CSS transitions only occur...

I've made this change here, and on all other pages where this occurs.

- [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) property
  - : Add `display` to the transitions list so that the popover will remain as `display: block` for the duration of the transition, ensuring the other transitions are visible.
- [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) property
  - : Include `overlay` in the transitions list to ensure the removal of the popover from the top layer is deferred until the transition completes, again ensuring the transition is visible.
- {{cssxref("transition-behavior")}} property

>   - : Set `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` on the `display` and `overlay` transitions to enable discrete transitions on these two properties that are not by default animatable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : Set `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` on the `display` and `overlay` transitions (or on the {{cssxref("transition")}} shorthand) to enable discrete transitions on these two properties that are not by default animatable.
```

Author: Yup, good call. Change made on this page, and on the `<dialog>` element page where it also appears.

<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

The CSS for the example looks like this:

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

/* Transition for the popover itself */

[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;
  opacity: 0;
  transform: scaleX(0);
  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,
    transform 0.7s,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    display 0.7s allow-discrete;
  /* Equivalent to
    all 0.7s allow-discrete */
}

/* Needs to be after the previous [popover]:popover-open rule to take effect,
    as the specificity is the same */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}

/* Transition for the popover's backdrop */

[popover]::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  transition:
    display 0.7s allow-discrete,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    background-color 0.7s;
  /* Equivalent to
    all 0.7s allow-discrete */
}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25);
}

/* This starting-style rule cannot be nested inside the above selector

> because the nesting selector cannot represent pseudo-elements. */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because the nesting selector (`&`) cannot represent pseudo-elements. */
```
so few people know what the nesting selector is we should likely show it

Author: Good call; added

@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  }
}
```

> The two popover properties we want to transition are [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform). We want the popover to fade in or out while growing or shrinking horizontally. To achieve this, we set a starting state for these properties on the default hidden state of the popover element (selected with the `[popover]` [attribute selector](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Attribute_selectors)) and an end state for the shown state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class). We also set the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property to define the properties to animate and the animation duration as the popover gets shown or hidden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two popover properties we want to transition are [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform). We want the popover to fade in or out while growing or shrinking horizontally. To achieve this, we set a starting state for these properties on the hidden state of the popover element (selected with the `[popover]` [attribute selector](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Attribute_selectors)) and an end state for the shown state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class). We also set the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property to define the properties to animate with an animation duration as the popover gets shown or hidden.
```
First edit: while it is the default state, people may be confused that it's only the original state we're talking about, not a 'back to hidden' state.
Last edit: or `and the animation's duration`.

Author: Update made

- Added `display` to the list of transitioned elements so that the animated element is visible (set to `display: block`) throughout both the entry and exit animation. Without this, the exit animation would not be visible; in effect, the popover would just disappear.
- Added `overlay` to the list of transitioned elements to make sure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. The effect of this may not be noticeable for basic animations such as this one, but in more complex cases, omitting this property can result in the element being removed from the overlay before the transition completes.
- Set `allow-discrete` on both the above transitions to enable [discrete transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animated_properties#discrete).

You'll note that we've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) appearing behind the popover when it opens, providing a nice darkening animation.

#### Result

The code renders as follows:

{{ EmbedLiveSample("Transitioning a popover", "100%", "200") }}

### A popover keyframe animation

> When animating a popover with CSS animations, there are some differences to note:

Author: Updated

- You don't provide a `@starting-style`; instead, you provide the starting values (including the initial `display` value) in an explicit starting keyframe (using `0%` or `from`).

> - You don't need to explicitly enable discrete animations; there is no equivalent to `allow-discrete` inside keyframes.

Author: Updated

- You don't need to set `overlay` inside keyframes either; the `display` animation handles the animation of the popover from shown to hidden.

Let's look at an example.

#### HTML

The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control:

```html
<button id="toggle-button" popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="manual" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

The CSS is as follows:

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;
  animation: fade-out 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

[popover]:popover-open {
  animation: fade-in 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
  animation: backdrop-fade-in 0.7s ease-out forwards;
}

/* Animation keyframes */

@keyframes fade-in {
  0% {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);

>     display: none;

Reviewer 2: Technically in this case we don't need `animation-fill-mode` `forward` or `both` (on line 450 and 454) because animation end states are same as opened or hidden popover. So we don't need to use `display` in keyframes.
Following code also works:
```css
@keyframes fade-in {
  0% {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 1;
    transform: scaleX(1);
  }
}

@keyframes fade-out {
  0% {
    opacity: 1;
    transform: scaleX(1);
    /* we do need this one cos it holds the popover visible till animation ends :) */
    display: block;
  }

  100% {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

Author: OK, so I've removed the `forwards` instances that aren't needed; that makes a lot of sense.

But I've left the `display` instances in place for now, as I'm confused as to why it works without them. I thought we'd need these, otherwise, the animation wouldn't show? You'd just see the off and on states as `display` goes from `none` to `block`?

In fact I'm pretty sure that is how it used to behave; I am wondering if the behavior has changed here since I first wrote these docs.  If not, then I'm fundamentally misunderstanding something quite major here.

I'll ask the Chrome engineers about it.

Reviewer: By default, the popover and backdrop are not displayed unless they are open. With animations, if a property is animated but only one keyframe value is set with that property, the value goes from (or to) the initial value. In this case, that is display none at 0%

Author: Ah, of course, yes. Thanks!

OK, so I've removed display from the entry animation keyframes, and kept it on both the exit animation keyframes. I know it works without the last one, but it feels good to me to be explicit.

I've also added a helpful comment, like the one @OnkarRuikar suggested in his version.
